CHARTER
EDITOR'S NOTE:  The University Heights Charter was approved by the voters on
June 3, 1941.  Dates appearing in parentheses following section headings in the
Table of Contents, and following sections in the text, indicate that those
sections were subsequently amended, added or repealed on the date given.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE (11-3-2009)
ARTICLE 1  -  POWERS
ARTICLE 2  -  NOMINATIONS, ELECTIONS, QUALIFICATIONS AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS
   
Sec. 1.   Nominations and Elections. (11-5-1957), (11-6-2012)
   
Sec. 2.   Qualifications of Officers. (11-7-1995)
   
Sec. 3.   Removal of Officers.
ARTICLE 3  -  COUNCIL
   
Sec. 1.   Powers, Number and Term.
   
Sec. 2.   Organization. (11-5-1957)
   
Sec. 3.   Vacancy. (11-6-79)
   
Sec. 4.   Clerk of Council. (11-6-1979)
   
Sec. 5.   Procedure. (11-5-1957), (11-6-1979), (11-3-2009)
   
Sec. 6.   When Ordinances and Resolutions Take Effect. (11-6-1979)
   
Sec. 7.   Mayor's Veto.
ARTICLE 4  -  INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
   
Sec. 1.   Initiative.
   
Sec. 2.   Referendum. (11-3-2009)
   
Sec. 3.   Recall. (11-6-1979)
   
Sec. 4.   Petitions.
ARTICLE 5  -  THE MAYOR
   
Sec. 1.   Executive and Administrative Powers.
   
Sec. 2.   Term.
   
Sec. 3.   Vacancy. (11-6-1979)
   
Sec. 4.   General Powers and Duties. (11-6-1979)
ARTICLE 6  -  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS
   
Sec. 1.   General Provisions. (11-6-1979)
ARTICLE 7  -  COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
   
Sec. 1.   General Provisions. (11-6-1979), (11-3-2009)
   
Sec. 2.   City Planning Commission. (11-8-1966)
   
Sec. 3.   Civil Service Commission. (11-8-1966), (9-9-1988), (11-3-2009)
   
Sec. 4.   Board of Zoning Appeals. (11-6-1979)
ARTICLE 8  -  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   
Sec. 1.   Contracts and Fiscal Matters.
   
Sec. 2.   Franchises.
   
Sec. 3.   Salaries and Bonds. (11-8-1957)
   
Sec. 4.   Pension and Relief Funds.
   
Sec. 5.   Amendments.
   
Sec. 6.   When Charter Takes Effect.
   
Sec. 7.   Savings Clause.
   
Sec. 8.   Effect of Charter Upon Existing Laws and Rights.
   
Sec. 9.   Limitation on Rate of Taxation. (11-7-1989)
   
Sec. 10.   Enacting Section 9. (5-3-1966)
   
Sec. 11.   Construction.  (1-6-1979)
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of University Heights, Ohio, grateful to Almighty
God for our freedom, to secure its blessings, to provide a municipal government
that shall be efficient and beneficial, to ensurethe full measure of self-
government granted to us by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Ohio, and
to promote our common peace, safety and welfare, do ordain and establish this
Charter.
(11-3-2009)
ARTICLE 1.  POWERS
   The City of University Heights, as its limits are now or may hereafter be,
shall continue to be a municipal corporation of the State of Ohio under the
same name.
   There are hereby reserved to the City of University Heights all powers,
general or special, governmental or proprietary, which may now or hereafter
lawfully be possessed or exercised by any municipal corporation of Ohio. No
enumeration herein of specific powers shall be held to be exclusive.
   The powers of this City may be exercised in the manner prescribed in this
Charter, or, to the extent that the manner is not prescribed herein, in such
manner as the Council may prescribe. The powers of this City may also be
exercised, except as a contrary intent appears in this Charter or in the
enactments of the Council conformably hereto in such manner as may now or
hereafter be provided by the general law of Ohio.
   None of the powers herein reserved shall be withdrawn from the exclusive
control of this City, nor shall the corporate existence of this City be
terminated or merged, nor shall any territory be detached from or annexed to
this City without the assent of at least a majority of the electors of this
City voting upon such proposition.
ARTICLE 2. NOMINATION, ELECTIONS, QUALIFICATIONS AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS
   SECTION 1. Nominations and Elections. Nominations for elective officers of
this City shall be made only by petition, signed by registered electors of the
City not less in number than three percent (3%) of the number voting at the
last regular municipal election and accompanied by the written acceptance of
the nominee. The nomination of each candidate shall be made by separate
petition and filed with the Board of Elections not later than 4:00 o'clock p.m.
on the ninetieth (90th) (day prior to the date of election. No primary election
shall be held for the selection of candidates for any elective office of the
City. No nomination to any elective office of this City shall be of any effect
unless made as required by this section. The ballot used in the election of
officers of this City shall be without party mark or designation. The names of
all candidates for City office shall be placed upon the same ballot, and shall
be rotated in the manner provided by the general law of Ohio. Except as
provided in this Charter, the general laws of Ohio shall govern the nomination
and election of the elective officers of the City.
(11-5-1957; 11-6-2012)
   SECTION 2. Qualifications of Officers. Each elective officer of the City
shall be a qualified elector of the City, shall have resided continuously
therein not less than one year next preceding his election, and shall continue
to reside therein during his term of office. He shall hold no other elective
public office during his term, neither shall he hold any other public
employment incompatible with his elective office in this City during such term,
except as otherwise provided in this Charter, and further excepting the office
of notary public and membership in the militia or reserve corps. The Council
shall determine whether any public employment is incompatible with his elective
office in this City.
   No officer of this City, elective or otherwise, shall have any financial
interest in any contract with or expenditure of money by this City other than
his fixed compensation and for expenses of travel as provided in Section 3 of
Article 8. Such interest shall disqualify him from holding office, in addition
to the other penalties provided by law.
   Every officer of this City shall, before assuming the duties of his office,
take and subscribe his oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of Ohio and faithfully, honestly and
impartially to discharge the duties of the office, and shall give such bond as
may be required of him conformably to this Charter.
   Commencing January 1, 1996, without counting terms held prior to that date
in such office, no person shall be eligible to hold the same elective office in
the City for more than three (3) consecutive four (4) year elective terms or
fourteen (14) consecutive years whether elected or appointed. "Consecutive"
shall include time out of office for less than sixty (60) days.
(11-7-1995.)
   SECTION 3. Removal of Officers. Any officer of this City shall be subject to
removal in such manner as is now or may hereafter be provided by the general
laws of Ohio, or by this Charter.
   In addition, the Council may remove any officer of the City, including
Councilman, for violation of any of the provisions of the next preceding
section, or for failing or ceasing to possess any other qualification
established by this Charter for his office, or for the conviction while in
office of any crime involving moral turpitude, but no such removal shall be
made without the concurrence of at least five members of the Council nor until
the accused officer shall have been given a written copy of the charges against
him and an opportunity to be heard, with at least ten days notice of the time
and place of hearing.
   Absence of a Councilman from five consecutive regular meetings of the
Council, without such absence being authorized by an affirmative vote of four
of the remaining members of the Council, shall operate to vacate such office of
Councilman forthwith.
ARTICLE 3. COUNCIL
   SECTION 1. Powers, Number and Term. The legislative power of the City,
except as limited by this Charter, and such additional powers as may be
expressly granted by this Charter, shall be vested in a Council of seven
members elected at large. The terms of the members of the Council shall begin
the first day of January next following their election, and they shall serve
for a term of four years or until their successors are chosen and qualified
except that of the seven members elected in 1941 the three receiving the
highest number of votes shall serve for four years and the remaining four shall
serve for two years.
   SECTION 2. Organization. At the first Council meeting in January, but not
later than the 7th day of January in the year 1958, and in January of each
second year thereafter the Council shall meet in the Council Chamber and
organize. At such organization meeting the Council shall elect by a majority
vote one Councilman, Vice-Mayor, and Councilmen members of boards and
commissions required by this Charter or by ordinance, each to serve until the
next organization meeting unless he shall cease in the meantime to be a
councilman.
(11-5-1957)
   SECTION 3. Vacancy.  Any vacancy in the Council, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter, shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of
the remaining members of the Council. If the vacancy be not so filled within
thirty (30) days, the Mayor shall fill it by appointment. Such appointee shall
hold office for the unexpired term of the member in whose office the vacancy
occurs or until a successor is elected and qualified.
   A successor shall be elected at the next general municipal election if:
   1.   More than two (2) years remain in the unexpired term when the vacancy
occurs; and if
   2.   The vacancy occurs more than seventy-five (75) days prior to such
election.
   At such election each candidate for Council, in his declaration of candidacy
and nominating petition, shall designate the term of office to which he seeks
election by stating therein, if a full term, the date of commencement of said
term as follows: "Full term commencing (DATE ) " or by stating therein, if an
unexpired term, the date on which it will end, as follows: "Unexpired term
ending (DATE)". The term of no councilman shall be lengthened by his
resignation and subsequent appointment, but an appointee may be a candidate for
subsequent election.
(11-6-1979)
   SECTION 4. Clerk of Council. The Council shall appoint a Clerk who shall be
the Clerk of the Council and Secretary of the City Planning Commission, the
Civil Service Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, and such other boards
and commissions as the Council may establish by ordinance. He shall give all
notices of meetings, keep the records and minutes of the Council and of the
boards and commissions of which he is secretary, authenticate all records,
documents and instruments of the City on which authentication is proper, and
for that purpose shall have and use a seal.
   The Clerk shall examine warrants and disbursement checks approved by the
Director of Finance and shall countersign checks in the manner provided by
ordinance. He shall perform all such other duties as the Council may require.
(11-6-1979)
   SECTION 5. Procedure. A majority of the members elected to the Council shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a less number may
adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. The
Council shall keep a journal of its proceedings.
   All regular and special meetings of Council and Council committees shall be
publicly announced and shall be open to the public in accordance with the
provisions of the Ohio "Sunshine Law" as it may be amended from time to time,
presently codified at Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code. Council may hold
an executive session at any regular or special meeting of Council, upon the
majority roll call vote of a quorum of Council, for the sole purpose of the
consideration of any matter specified in Ohio Revised Code Section 121.22, as
it may be amended from time to time.
   The Council shall, by ordinance, make provision for the following:
   a.   The time and place of regular meetings, providing for at least two
regular meetings in each calendar month excepting the months of July and
August;
   b.   The manner of calling special meetings;
   c.   The enforcement of attendance at its meetings and punishment of
disorderly conduct thereat;
   d.   The form and method of enacting ordinances and resolutions, but no
ordinance or resolution except general appropriation ordinances shall contain
more than one subject which shall be clearly stated in the title; and general
appropriation ordinances shall be confined to the subject of appropriations;
   e.   The manner of giving public notice of the enactment of ordinances and
of any other of its acts or proceedings which it deems proper to publish;
   f.   The reduction of unpaid installments and the return of paid
installments of assessments levied in larger amounts than necessary to pay for
public improvements, to the extent that such reductions and returns are
authorized by the general law of Ohio;
   g.   The procedure for making public improvements and for levying
assessments, provided that two or more public improvements, including the
levying of assessments therefor, may be combined in one proceeding if the
Council finds that it will be economical and practical to undertake said
improvements jointly;
   h.   The advertising and awarding of contracts;
   i.   The employment of expert consultants to advise and assist the city
officials and employees with respect to municipal problems and such other
general regulations as the Council may deem necessary;
   j.   The printing, publishing and distribution of financial reports and such
other reports of general interest as the Council shall determine, at City
expense, providing that such reports shall be factual only and do not express
an opinion or promote any person, position, group of persons, or any idea,
theory or viewpoint of a political or controversial nature.
(11-5-1957), (11-6-1979), (11-3-2009)
   SECTION 6. When Ordinances and Resolutions Take Effect.
   a.   A resolution which is approved by not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the
members of Council shall take effect upon the signature of the Mayor, if it so
provides, and no second reading thereof shall be required.
   b.   An emergency ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation of
public peace, health or safety, which sets forth the reasons for emergency
action and which has the approval of not less than two-thirds () of the members
of Council shall take effect at the time provided therein upon the signature of
the Mayor, or at the expiration of the time within which it may be disapproved
by the Mayor, or upon the Council's override of the Mayor's disapproval.
   c.   No action of the Council in authorizing any change of the boundaries of
the City, or the surrender or joint exercise of any of its powers, or in
granting any franchise, or in contracting for the supply to the City or its
inhabitants of the product or service of any utility, whether municipally owned
or not, shall be taken as an emergency measure.
   d.   Ordinances for the appropriation of money and those providing for an
annual tax levy, or for improvements petitioned for by the owners of a majority
of the feet front of the property benefitted and to be specially assessed
therefor, shall take effect at the time stated therein upon signature by the
Mayor, or at the expiration of the time within which it may be disapproved by
the Mayor, or upon the Council's override of the Mayor's disapproval.
   e.   All other resolutions and ordinances shall be read on two (2) separate
days before they may be approved by the Council, and no such ordinance or
resolution shall go into effect until thirty (30) days after passage by the
Council.
(11-6-1979)
   SECTION 7. Mayor's Veto. Every ordinance or resolution of the Council shall
be signed by the Clerk or two members of the Council and presented to the Mayor
forthwith for consideration before it goes into effect. The Mayor, if he
approves it, shall sign it and file it with the Clerk. The Mayor may approve or
disapprove the whole or any item of an ordinance appropriating money, but
otherwise his approval or disapproval shall be addressed to the entire
ordinance or resolution. If he disapproves it or any item of it, he shall file
it with written notice of the disapproval with the Clerk. Unless an ordinance
or resolution is filed with the Clerk with written notice of disapproval,
within seven days after its passage by the Council, it shall take effect as
though the Mayor had signed it. When the Mayor has disapproved an ordinance or
resolution or item of it, as herein provided, the Council may, at its next
regular meeting thereafter, reconsider it and if upon such reconsideration the
ordinance, resolution or item is approved by the votes of five or more of the
members of the Council, it shall take effect notwithstanding the disapproval of
the Mayor.
ARTICLE 4. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
   SECTION 1. Initiative. The electors of the City shall have power to propose
any ordinance or resolution, except an ordinance for the appropriation of money
or an ordinance making a tax levy, and to adopt or reject the same at the
polls, such power being known as the initiative. An initiated ordinance or
resolution may be submitted to the Clerk of the Council by petition signed by
at least five percent (5%) of the registered electors of the City, When so
submitted, the Clerk shall forthwith determine the sufficiency of the petition
and if found sufficient, the Council shall at once have the proposed ordinance
or resolution read and referred to an appropriate committee which may be a
committee of the whole. Provision shall be made for public hearings on the
proposed ordinance or resolution not later than thirty (30) days after the date
on which such ordinance or resolution was submitted to the Clerk. The Council
shall within forty (40) days after such ordinance or resolution is submitted,
take final action thereon, either enacting or rejecting the proposed ordinance
or resolution. If the Council fails or refuses to pass such proposed ordinance
or resolution or passes it in some form different from that set forth in the
petition therefor, the committee of the petitioners may require that it be
submitted to a vote of the electors either in its original form or in the
amended form by filing with the Clerk a supplemental petition signed by that
number of additional registered electors which, when taken together with those
who signed the original petition, will total at least ten percent (10%) of the
registered electors of the City, and if said supplemental petition is signed by
that number of additional registered electors which, when taken together with
those who signed the original petition, will total at least twenty percent
(20%) of the registered electors the date of the election may be fixed therein,
not less than sixty (60) days from the time of filing such supplemental
petition. Such supplemental petition shall be filed within ten (10) days after
the final action on such ordinance or resolution by the Council. The Council
shall thereupon provide, for submitting such ordinance or resolution to the
vote of the electors at the date so fixed, or at the next general election in
any year occurring more than sixty (60) days from the filing of such
supplemental petition, if no date be so fixed therein.
   SECTION 2. Referendum. The electors shall have the power to approve or
reject at the polls any ordinance or resolution passed by the Council, except
as hereinafter provided. Within thirty (30) days after the final passage by the
Council of an ordinance or resolution, a petition signed by at least ten
percent (10%) of the registered electors of the City may be filed with the
Clerk of the Council, requesting that such ordinance or resolution be either
repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors. If said petition is signed by
twenty percent (20%) or more of such registered electors, the date of the
election may be fixed therein, not less than ninety (90) days from the time of
filing thereof. When such petition is filed, the Clerk shall first ascertain
the sufficiency of the petition, and if found sufficient, the Council shall
thereupon, within thirty (30) days of the filing of such petition, reconsider
such ordinance or resolution. If upon such reconsideration the ordinance or
resolution is not repealed, the Council shall provide for submitting it to a
vote of the electors on the date so fixed, or at the first general election in
any year occurring more than ninety (90) days from the filing of such petition,
if no date be so fixed. No such ordinance or resolution shall go into effect
until approved by a majority of those voting thereon. When the Council by law
or under provisions of general ordinances, is required to pass more than one
ordinance or resolution necessary to make and pay for any public improvement,
the referendum provisions shall apply only to the first ordinance or resolution
required to be passed and not to any subsequent ordinances or resolutions
relating thereto. Ordinances providing for the annual tax levy or for
improvements petitioned by the owners of a majority of the feet front of the
property benefitted and to be specially assessed therefor, and appropriation
ordinances limited to the subject of appropriations shall not be subject to
referendum, but all other ordinances, including emergency ordinances, shall be
subject to referendum, except that emergency ordinances shall go into effect at
the time indicated therein. If, when submitted to a vote of the electors, an
emergency measure be not approved by a majority of those voting thereon, it
shall be considered repealed as regards any further action thereunder; but such
measure shall be deemed sufficient authority for payment, in accordance with
the ordinance, of any expense incurred previous to the referendum vote thereon.
   Ordinances submitted to the Council by initiative petition and passed by the
Council either with or without change, but not required to be submitted to a
vote of the electors, shall be subject to referendum in the same manner as
other ordinances.
(11-3-2009)
   SECTION 3. Recall. The electors shall have the power to remove from office
by recall election any elective officer of the City. At any time after an
elective officer has held office for six months of the term for which he was
chosen, a petition demanding his removal and the election of a successor in his
office may be filed with the Clerk of the Council. Such petition shall comply
with the provisions of Section 4 of this Article, and shall be signed by
registered electors equal in number to at least twenty-five (25%) percent of
the total number of voters casting ballots at the last preceding general
municipal election. Within ten (10) days from the date of filing such petition,
the Clerk shall determine the sufficiency thereof. If the Clerk shall find the
petition insufficient, he shall promptly certify the particulars in which the
petition is defective and deliver a copy of his certificate to the person who
filed the petition with him, and such person shall be allowed twenty (20) days
from the delivery of such copy of certificate in which to make the petition
sufficient. If the Clerk shall find the petition sufficient he shall promptly
so certify to the Council and to the officer whose removal is sought, and, if
the officer does not resign within five (5) days thereafter, the Council shall
thereupon order and fix a day for holding a recall election, not less than
thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days from the date of the Clerk's
certificate of sufficiency. At such recall election the name of the officer
whose removal is sought shall be placed on the ballot as a candidate to succeed
himself, unless he otherwise requests in writing at least twenty (20) days
prior thereto, and the names of such other candidates for the same office shall
be placed on the ballot as shall have been nominated in accordance with Article
2 Section 1 of this Charter at least twenty (20) days prior to such recall
election. The recall election, except as it shall be limited to the offices
from which a removal is sought, shall in other respects conform to the
provisions of Article 2 Section 1 of this Charter. If at the recall election
the incumbent does not receive a plurality of the votes cast, the candidate who
does receive such a plurality shall be declared elected to succeed the
incumbent for the remainder of his term, and the incumbent shall be deemed
removed from his office when such elected successor qualifies for the office or
within ten (10) days after the recall election.
(11-6-1979)
   SECTION 4. Petitions. An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be
circulated in separate parts, but the separate parts shall be bound together
and filed as one instrument. Each part shall contain in the case of the
initiative or referendum, a full and correct copy of the title and the text of
the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution, and in the case of the
recall, the name and office of the person whose removal is sought and a
statement in not more than two hundred words of the grounds for the removal.
ARTICLE 5. THE MAYOR
   SECTION 1. Executive and Administrative Powers. The executive and
administrative powers of the City shall be vested in the Mayor, directors of
departments and other administrative officers provided for in this Charter or
by ordinance.
   SECTION 2. Term. The Mayor shall be elected at the regular municipal
election in 1941 and every fourth year thereafter for a term of four years,
commencing on the first day of January next after such election, and shall
serve until his successor is elected and qualified.
   SECTION 3. Vacancy. When the Mayor is absent and inaccessible, or is unable
for any cause to perform his duties, the Vice Mayor shall be acting Mayor, but
shall not thereby cease to be a councilman. In case of death, resignation or
removal, other than by recall election, of the Mayor or his ceasing to qualify
for the office, the Vice-Mayor shall vacate his office of councilman and shall
become Mayor to serve the unexpired term or until a successor for the unexpired
term is elected and qualified.
   A successor shall be elected at the next regular municipal election provided
that:
   1.   Such election occurs more than two (2) years prior to the expiration of
the unexpired term; and
   2.   The vacancy occurs more than seventy-five (75) days prior to such
election.
   A Vice-Mayor, who has become Mayor, may be a candidate to succeed himself.
(11-6-1979)
   SECTION 4. General Powers and Duties.
   A.   Judicial. The Mayor shall have all the judicial powers granted by the
general laws of Ohio to mayors of cities, unless and until other lawful
provisions shall be made for the exercise of such powers.
   B.   Legislative. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council and
shall have the power to veto as specified in Article 3 Section 7 of this
Charter. The directors of all departments established by this Charter, or by
ordinance, also shall be entitled to seats in the Council. Neither the Mayor
nor any director of any department shall have a vote in the Council, but the
Mayor shall have the right to introduce ordinances and to take part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the Council; and the directors of
departments shall be entitled to take part in all discussions in the Council
relating to their respective departments.
   C.   Executive. The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City.
He shall supervise the administration of the City's affairs, and shall exercise
control over all departments and divisions except those reserved to Council or
its officers and employees by this Charter. He shall be the chief conservator
of the peace within the City and shall see that all laws and ordinances are
enforced therein. He shall be responsible for the preparation and submission to
the Council of the annual estimate of receipts and expenditures, and
appropriation measure, and shall at all times keep the Council fully advised as
to the financial condition and needs of the City. He shall recommend to the
Council such measures as he deems necessary or expedient. He shall see that all
terms and conditions imposed in favor of this City or its inhabitants in any
franchise or contract to which this City is a party are faithfully kept and
performed.
   The Mayor shall appoint all officers and employees of the City, except
members, officers and employees of the Council, judges, Clerk of Council and
the Director of Law and their assistants. All persons appointed by the Mayor,
except those whose terms of office are fixed by this Charter or by law, may be
promoted, transferred, reduced or removed by the Mayor, subject however, to the
Civil Service provisions of this Charter. The foregoing appointive powers of
the Mayor may be delegated by him to the directors of any department or to the
heads of any divisions with respect to the officers or employees in the
classified service within their respective departments or divisions.
   The Mayor shall execute on behalf of the City all contracts, conveyances,
evidences of indebtedness and all other instruments to which the City is a
party.
   The Mayor shall be recognized as the official and ceremonial head of the
City government, by the governor for military purposes, and by the courts for
the purpose of serving civil processes.
(11-6-1979)
ARTICLE 6. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS
   SECTION 1. General Provisions. A Department of Law, a Department of Finance,
a Department of Public Safety, and a Department of Public Service and
Properties are hereby established by this Charter, and the Council shall
provide by ordinance for the organization thereof. The Council may establish by
ordinance new departments or divisions thereof. With the exception of the Law
and Finance Departments, the Council may combine or abolish existing
departments and divisions as it may deem necessary and may authorize one person
to be the head of two or more departments or divisions.
   SECTION 2. Department of Law shall be in charge of the Director of Law,
appointed by the Council to serve at the pleasure thereof. The Director of Law
shall be duly admitted to the practice of law in Ohio. He shall be the city
solicitor and shall perform all duties required by ordinance and the duties
which are imposed upon city solicitors by the general law of Ohio.
   SECTION 3. Department of Finance shall be headed by the Director of Finance,
who shall be the fiscal officer and Treasurer of the City. He shall keep all
the financial records and accounts of the City and an accurate account of all
taxes and assessments, all assets and liabilities, all appropriations made by
the Council, and all receipts and disbursements by the City. All payrolls,
bills and other claims are subject to his examination and approval. He shall
issue warrants or checks for expenditures for which appropriations have been
duly made and shall sign checks as Council shall require. He shall assist the
Mayor and Council in the preparation of estimates, budgets and appropriations,
and shall perform all the duties required by this Charter or by ordinance of
Council.
   The Director of Finance shall serve as the Treasurer of the City and shall
be the collector and custodian of all monies of the City. He shall keep and
preserve them in such manner and in such places as the Council shall determine.
He shall receive and disburse all other public money coming into his hands as
Treasurer  in pursuance of such regulations as may be prescribed by the
authorities having lawful control over such funds.
   There shall be in the Department of Public Safety a Division of Police, a
Division of Fire, and a Division of Building Engineering and Inspection. (11-6-
1979)
ARTICLE 7. COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
   SECTION 1. General Provisions. A City Planning Commission, a Civil Service
Commission and a Board of Zoning Appeals are hereby established by this
Charter. The Council may establish by ordinance such other commissions or
boards as it may deem necessary for the proper administration or trusteeship of
any public fund, or for any proper municipal purpose. A member of any
commission or board established by this Charter or by the Council conformably
to this section shall be deemed an officer of this City within the meaning of
this Charter. No person shall be appointed to any commission or board of the
City who is related by blood or marriage to the Mayor or any member of Council.
(11-6-1979), (11-3-2009)
   SECTION 2. City Planning Commission. The City Planning Commission shall
consist of the Mayor, one member of Council to be selected by the Council, and
three electors of the City not holding other municipal office. The present
members of the City Planning Commission, other than the Mayor and Councilman,
shall continue to serve until the expiration of their respective terms, and
their successors shall each be appointed by the Mayor for a tern of four (4)
years. A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the City Planning
Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for
an original appointment.
   The City Planning Commission shall have such powers as may be conferred on
it by ordinance of the Council concerning the plan, design, location, removal,
relocation and alteration of any public buildings or structures or those
located on public streets or property; the location, relocation, widening,
extension and vacation of streets, parkways, playgrounds and other public
places, the approval of plats for the subdivision of land; the zoning and
rezoning of the City for any lawful purpose and such other powers as are now or
may hereafter be conferred upon it by ordinance of the Council or the general
law of Ohio.
(11-8-1968)
   SECTION 3. Civil Service Commission. The Civil Service Commission shall
consist of three electors of the City not holding other municipal office to be
recommended by the Mayor subject to consent and approval of a majority of
Council to serve for terms of six years, except that the first appointments
shall be for six, four and two years, respectively. At the time of any
appointment not more than two members of the Commission shall be members of the
same political party. A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the
Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner authorized for
an original appointment. A member of the Civil Service Commission may be
removed by the Mayor subject to consent and approval of a majority of Council
for neglect of duty, incapacity, incompetency, or malfeasance in office, but
only after opportunity has been given for a public hearing before the Council ,
to be held at least ten (10) days after written charges have been made and
notice thereof been given to the accused member. Such member shall be heard in
person or by counsel; and such removal shall be final.
   The Civil Service of the City is hereby divided into the unclassified and
classified service.
   1.   The unclassified service shall include:
      (a)   All officers elected by the people.
      (b)   All directors, heads and chiefs of departments and divisions and
their assistants.
      (c)   The Clerk of Council and Assistant Clerk.
      (d)   The City Engineer and Assistant Engineer.
      (e)   The members of all boards and commissions appointed by the Mayor or
Council.
      (f)   All employees in the Department of Public Service and Properties.
      (g)   Any temporary or part-time office or any, position requiring
qualifications of an expert.
   2.   The classified service shall comprise all positions not specifically
included by this section in the unclassified service.
   The Civil Service Commission shall make necessary rules for the appointment,
promotion, transfer, lay-off, reinstatement, suspension and removal of persons
in the classified service. In the case of hiring and in the case of promotion,
the Commission shall make necessary rules with regard to eligibility lists and
with regard to certification of the number and the names of candidates from
eligibility lists and with regard to the process of selection and appointment
of those certified. Before any such rules or amendments thereof shall become
effective, they shall be published in writing and an opportunity given for a
public hearing thereon to be held after reasonable notice thereof has been
given by the Commission.
   The Commission shall provide rules for the procedure of the Commission, for
standardization and classification of positions, for competitive and
noncompetitive tests, for qualifications in meeting reasonable requirements as
to age, sex, physical condition and moral character, for investigating and
keeping a record of the efficiency of the personnel in the classified service
and for requiring reports relative thereto from appointing authority, for such
other rules as may be necessary and proper for the enforcement of the merit
system and for appeals from the action of appointing authority in the case of
transfer, reduction or removal and the action of the Commission on any such
appeal shall be final.
   When a position in the competitive classified service is to be filled by
appointment as a hire or as a promotion, the appointing authority upon making
that determination shall notify the Civil Service Commission of that fact and
the Commission shall certify to such authority the names and addresses of three
candidates standing highest on the eligibility list for the class or grade to
which such position belongs. The appointing authority shall appoint any one of
the three persons certified to him, to such position. A candidate who has been
considered for appointment or promotion at least three times may be decertified
by the Commission without further cause and shall thereafter be removed and be
ineligible from further consideration by the appointing authority until
recertification of eligibility on a subsequent list.
   The Commission shall report its proceedings to the Mayor or Council upon
request, and shall make a report to the Mayor at the beginning of each fiscal
year.
   All persons who have been continuously employed in the service of the
municipality in the same or similar position, herein included in the classified
service for at least thirty days preceding the adoption of this Charter shall
retain their positions until discharged, reduced, promoted, or transferred in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
(11-8-1966), (9-9-1988), (11-3-2009)
   SECTION 4. Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
such powers and membership as Council shall provide.
(11-6-1979)
ARTICLE 8. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
   SECTION 1. Contracts and Fiscal Matters. The general laws of Ohio relating
to budgets, appropriations, deposits, expenditures, debts, bonds, contracts,
and other fiscal matters of municipalities shall be applicable to this City
except as modified by or necessarily inconsistent with the provisions of this
Charter.
   SECTION 2. Franchises. The Council may by ordinance grant permission to any
person, firm or corporation to construct and operate a public utility on,
across, under or above any public street or ground within this City. It may
prescribe in the ordinance the kind and quality of service or product to be
furnished, the rate or rates to be charged therefor, and any other terms
conducive to the public interest. Such grant may be amended or renewed in the
manner and subject to the provisions established by this Charter for original
grants. Such grant, amendment or renewal shall be for such period of time not
exceeding twenty-five years as the Council may determine, and shall not be
exclusive.
   No consent of the owner of property abutting on any public street or ground
shall be necessary to the effectiveness of any such grant, amendment, or
renewal, unless the construction or operation of the public utility authorized
thereby is of such character as to constitute an additional burden upon such
public street or ground. All such grants, amendments or renewals shall be made
subject to the continuing right of the Council to provide reasonable
regulations for the operation of such utilities with reference to such streets
and public grounds, including the right to require such reconstruction,
relocation or discontinuance of appliances, plant or equipment used in such
streets or public grounds as shall, in the opinion of the Council, be necessary
in the public interest.
   No ordinance making, amending, or renewing such grant shall be passed by the
Council until it shall have been read at two regular meetings of the Council.
   SECTION 3. Salaries and Bonds. The Council shall fix the salary or
compensation of all officers and employees of the City, and may require any
officer or employee to give bond for the faithful performance of his duties in
such amount as it may determine and with such surety as it may approve, and may
from time to time require additional bond or surety of any officer or employee,
and may provide that the premium for any such bond be paid by the City.
(11-8-1957)
   Prior to the first day of November in 1959 and in each second year
thereafter, the Council shall fix the compensation of the officers to be
elected for the terms beginning on the next succeeding first day of January and
the compensation of such officers shall not thereafter be changed for such term
or any part thereof; except that for each absence of the councilman from a
regular meeting of the Council, unless authorized by the affirmative vote of at
least four other members thereof, there shall be deducted a sum equal to two
per cent (2%) of the annual salary of such Councilman. Persons filling
vacancies for the unexpired terms of elective officers shall receive the
compensation theretofore fixed for such elective officers. The compensation of
other officers and employees may be fixed and changed at any time in the
discretion of the Council. All fees pertaining to any office shall be paid into
the city treasury. The Council may authorize any officer or employee of the
City to make such travel as the Council deems to be in the public interest, and
may provide that the expense of such travel be paid by the City.
   SECTION 4. Pension and Relief Funds. The Council shall provide by ordinance
for the establishment and maintenance of a police relief fund and of other
pension, relief and retirement funds provided for by the general laws of the
State of Ohio.
   SECTION 5. Amendments. The Council may, by vote of at least five of its
members, submit to the electors of the City of University Heights amendments to
this Charter, and, upon petition signed by ten percent (10%) of the registered
electors of this City setting forth any proposed amendment, such proposed
amendment shall be so submitted by the Council. The submission of any proposed
amendment to the electors shall be governed by the requirements of the
Constitution of Ohio, and, to such extent as said Constitution shall fail to
provide therefor, the Council shall determine the manner for such submission.
If any such amendment is approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon,
it shall become a part of this Charter; except that if two or more inconsistent
amendments on the same subject are submitted at the same election, only the one
of such amendments receiving the largest affirmative vote, nor less than a
majority, shall become a part of this Charter.
   SECTION 6. When Charter Takes Effect. For the purpose of nominating and
electing officers of this City and fixing the compensation of those elected in
1941, this Charter shall be in effect from and after the time of its approval
by the electors of this City; and for all other purposes it shall be in effect
on and after the first day of January, 1942.
   SECTION 7. Saying Clause. The determination that any part of this Charter is
invalid shall not invalidate nor impair the force or effect of any other part
hereof, except to the extent that such other part is dependent for its
operation upon the part declared invalid.
   SECTION 8. Effect of Charter Upon Existing Laws and Rights. The taking
effect of this Charter shall not affect any pre-existing rights of this
municipality, nor any right or liability or pending suit of prosecution either
on behalf of or against the municipality, nor any contract entered into by the
municipality nor for its benefit, nor any franchise granted by the
municipality, nor pending proceedings for the authorization of public
improvements or the levy of assessments therefor.
   SECTION 9. Limitation on Rate of Taxation. The power of the Council without
a vote of the people to levy taxes on property assessed and levied according to
value, for the purpose of paying the current operating expenses, including the
purpose of paying the police and firemen pensions, the establishment and
continuation of a paramedic service, the protection of the health, safety and
general welfare of the City, any or all of which is required to be, or may
lawfully be included in the general levy for the general fund of the City,
shall not exceed eight and one-half (8.5) mills per dollar of assessed
valuation, outside the limitation imposed by the Constitution and statutes of
the State of Ohio.
(11-7-1989)
   SECTION 10. Effective Date of Section 9.  This amendment enacting Section 9
shall become a part of the Charter of the City of University Heights, Ohio,
effective as of the date of certification of the abstract of said election and
adoption to the Secretary of State by the Board of Elections, according to law,
for the purpose of fixing the tax rates including a levy upon the duplicate for
the current year of 1966 and thereafter.
(5-3-1966)
   SECTION 11. Construction. Masculine pronouns used in this Charter shall be
construed to include the feminine pronoun, and the singular number shall be
construed to include the plural number whenever the context shall require.
   Except as a contrary intent appears herein, all acts of the Council of this
municipality shall continue in effect until lawfully amended or repealed.
(11-6-1979)
   On July 31, 1978 the Mayor and Council approved Resolution No. 78-20, which
established a Commission to review the Charter of the City of University
Heights. Seven members of the Commission1  were elected at the regular election
held on November 7, 1978. Seven other members2 were appointed by members of the
City Council. The fifteenth member3 was appointed by the Mayor.
   1.   Dale R. Friedland, Judith Guttman, Marvin Jaffe, Annette Paley, Alan
Rutsky, Alan Starkoff and Adele Zucker.
   2.   Alec Berezin, Dennis Brennan, Louis Logsdon, Joseph Saslaw, Lee Tucker,
Leonore Vannice and Paul A. Woelfl, S.J.
   3.   Mark O' Neill, Chairman.
INFORMATION PERTAINING TO THE ORIGINAL CHARTER COMMISSION:
The Charter Commission of the City of University Heights, Ohio elected November
5th, 1940 has framed the foregoing Charter, and has fixed June 3rd, 1941, as
the time of the election at which said Charter shall be submitted to the
electors of the Municipality.
THE CHARTER COMMISSION
   Earl W. Aurelius, Chairman    Charles Falk
   Roy J. Madden, Vice-Chairman     George I. Goodman
   A. W. Anderson    Carl F. Koenig
   A. C. J. Brickel    Ralph IC. LePrevost
   Leonard C. Corcoran    George E. Line
   Arthur H. Craig    Brooks W. Maccracken
   J. E. Crouch    Edmund C. Manning
   Louis A. Logsdon, Secretary
